[Handwriting] Add Handwriting CSS Value i2i Explainer (#903)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: Handwriting/HandwritingIntentCSSValue.md

## Proposed Solution

Introduce a new value, `handwriting`, to the CSS property `touch-action` which allows authors to specify whether an element should allow handwriting input. 

The `touch-action` CSS property is used by authors to define for whether user agents should execute their [direct manipulation](https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#dfn-direct-manipulation) behavior for touch and pen gestures. When the spec was written this only included panning and zooming. The `manipulation` value for `touch-action` will be expanded to also indicate that the user agent may consider handwriting interactions on the element.

When the `touch-action` CSS property is specified for an Element, only the mentioned behaviors will be enabled on the Element and all the possible `touch-action` values that are not explicitly mentioned are then disabled for the Element.

Authors are used to the [recommended practice of adding touch-action: none](https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#example_10) to elements over which they wish to handle all events themselves.

### Syntax

```html
<style>
.handwritable {
  touch-action: handwriting;
}
.not-handwritable {
  touch-action: pan-x;
}
</style>

> <textarea class="handwritable"></textarea>                                         <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->

Reviewer: Can you please have the same alignment for all the comments for better readability?

<textarea class="not-handwritable"></textarea>                                         <!-- the computed handwriting value is false -->

<textarea></textarea>                                         <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->
<textarea style="touch-action:handwriting;"></textarea>       <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->
<textarea style="touch-action:pan-x;"></textarea>             <!-- the computed handwriting value is false -->
<textarea style="touch-action:pan-x handwriting;"></textarea> <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->
<textarea style="touch-action:manipulation;"></textarea>      <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->

<div style="touch-action:pan-x;">
  <textarea></textarea>                                       <!-- the computed handwriting value is false -->

>   <textarea style="touch-action:handwriting;"></textarea>     <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->

Reviewer: Based on my understanding of [1] and analogy with [2] I think the computed handwriting value is false here. Similar comment for the paragraph below. @adettenb - what do you think?

[1] https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#determining-supported-direct-manipulation-behavior
[2] https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#example_10

Reviewer 2: You're understanding is correct.
These should be false, they have an ancestor that's more restrictive.
For any particular Node, itself and all ancestors must allow `handwriting` for it to be allowed.
Thanks for catching this!

Author: Good catch, fixed.

  <textarea style="touch-action:pan-y;"></textarea>           <!-- the computed handwriting value is false -->
</div>

<div class="not-handwritable">
  <textarea></textarea>                                       <!-- the computed handwriting value is false -->
  <textarea class="handwritable"></textarea>     <!-- the computed handwriting value is true -->
</div>
```

### Keywords and States

The `handwriting` keyword indicates whether an element and the element's descendants will allow handwriting input when supported by the user agent. Handwriting will only be allowed for an element when its computed `touch-action` includes the `handwriting` keyword. By default, `auto` and `manipulation` will include the `handwriting` keyword.

#### Determining enablement

All CSS properties have computed values for all elements. The enablement of handwriting in a given `element` can be determined by running the following steps:

> 1. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` does not contain the `handwriting` or `manipulation` keyword, **disable handwriting**.
> 2. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` does contain the `handwriting` or `manipulation` keyword, **enable handwriting**.
> 3. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` is `auto`, search `element`'s parent chain for an ancestor with a non-`auto` computed value for `touch-action`. Apply steps 1 and 2 to the computed value for `touch-action` on the lowest such ancestor.
> 4. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` and all of its ancestors is `auto`, **enable handwriting**.

Reviewer 2: Per Olga's comment, please update this section to something along the lines of:

```suggestion
1. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` and all of its ancestors include either keyword `auto`, `handwriting`, or `manipulation`, **enable handwriting**.
2. If the computed value for `touch-action` on `element` or any of its ancestors does not include either keyword `auto`, `handwriting`, or `manipulation`, **disable handwriting**.
```

### Caveats

A few pain points have been brought up that are worth discussion:

> * Web pages who currently have the `touch-action` property set for different Elements will lose the handwriting capabilities on this element even if they don't want to disable it. When the new keyword ships, the absence of the value will be interpreted as the author of the webpage intently disabling handwriting.

Reviewer: I think 'who' should be replace with 'that' and uppercase Elements changed to lowercase.

Author: There were many "who"s that should've been "that"s, fixed, thanks.

* [Pro] All websites who currently use `touch-action` won't have to update their rules if they want handwriting to be enabled.
* [Pro] An HTML attribute can be exposed to JavaScript as a IDL attribute which may be more ergonomic.
* [Con] Developers would have to keep track of both the `touch-action` CSS property and new HTML attribute in order to completely declare the desired behavior of their webpages.
 * [Con] CSS pattern matching is a powerful tool and may be more ergonomic for some use cases.

#### Why not an HTML+IDL attribute that interacts with `touch-action`?

`touch-action:none;` is the accepted and recommended way of disabling all types of touch interaction with the elements. The HTML attribute would not be able to override the `touch-action` property in these scenarios. By accepting touch-action as a filter, developers would lose the flexibility of disabling scrolling while enabling handwriting. Consider the following scenarios:

* `touch-action: none + HTML handwriting=false` disables handwriting.
* `touch-action: pan-x pan-y + HTML handwriting=false` disables handwriting.
* `touch-action: pan-x pan-y + HTML handwriting=true` enables handwriting.

> *  `touch-action: none + handwriting=true` disables handwriting? enables handwriting?

Reviewer 2: nit: -1 space after `*`

(e.g., `e.enableHandwriting()` or `e.setHandwritingState(...)`, `e.getHandwritingState()` and `e.getComputedHandwritingValue()`)

 * [Pro] Granular control over which elements should allow handwriting input.
 * [Con] Introduces more complexity and is not as simple as an HTML attribute or CSS property.
 * [Con] A CSS property can be exposed to JavaScript as a IDL attribute which may be more ergonomic.
 * [Con] If users, touch  and pen, or organizations disable JavaScript for their browsers there would need to be another mechanism to disable handwriting input.

### Why not some combination of all the above?
* [Pro] Allows for the greatest flexibility with multiple paths to achieve the same goal, so authors can choose the approach that best fits their use case or preference.
* [Con] More complex backend implementation and less obvious frontend implementation due to the combination available to specify per-document or per-element `handwriting` state.

### Why not extend a different attribute or property?
[HTML]  [inputmode](https://www.w3.org/TR/2002/WD-xforms-20020821/sliceE.html):
* Related to but distinct from `<input>`  `type`. Is only concerned with virtual keyboard inputs.

> [CSS]  [pointer-events](https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#pointerevent-interface):

Reviewer: I think the formatting here is not as intended.

### Why not extend a different attribute or property?
[HTML]  [inputmode](https://www.w3.org/TR/2002/WD-xforms-20020821/sliceE.html):
* Related to but distinct from `<input>`  `type`. Is only concerned with virtual keyboard inputs.
[CSS]  [pointer-events](https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#pointerevent-interface):
* Is concerned with whether an element or visual components of an element can be the target of a pointer event, not what kinds of pointer devices can be used.

## References and acknowledgements

* @**[flackr](https://github.com/flackr)**, @**[mustaqahmed](https://github.com/mustaqahmed)**, @**[adettenb](https://github.com/adettenb)**, @**[patrickhlauke](https://github.com/patrickhlauke)**, @**[ogerchikov](https://github.com/ogerchikov)** for carrying forward the discussion.
* Previous explainer: [Handwriting Explainer](Handwriting/explainer.md)
* Existing discussion: https://github.com/w3c/pointerevents/issues/516, https://www.w3.org/2024/11/06-pointerevents-minutes.html

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

> None other than the discussion linked in the **References and Acknowledgements** section

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth enumerating a few of these as well as referencing the conversations:

* `touch-action` in its current state may not be flexible enough for developers needs.
    * The property name, while clearly communicated in the Spec, isn't specific to touch behaviors as it includes stylus/pen actions as well.
    * Developers may want granular control over input type in addition to "actions".
    * Developers may want granular control to specify "action" precedence (handwriting then scrolling, or vice versa).
* Concerns with how handwriting and panning can intuitively co-exist, since it's possible a scrollable page with `touch-action: handwriting pan-y` may be unable to be panned. e.g., when the entire document is editable.

## References

> * [Input Method Editors (IME)]()

Reviewer 2: nit: Missing link
